standard size, easy to scan with ADF (no ruffled edges, tears, etc)
	 single-sided
	 double-sided

difficult to scan documents
	  oversized
	  gnarled

should not be scanned 
       redundant (i.e. a printout of an electronic document, e.g. a job application)
       premature ()

cards and letters

waste
	for shredding, with personally identifying information
	for recycling
	for trash

scanable but smaller than normal sized
	single-sided
	double-sided

receipts

newsletters, pamphlets and manuals

information that should be typed in rather than scanned
	handwritten notes

newspaper clippings

documents that must be handled urgently

coupons, check the date

items that are not documents, like cds, pills, etc

business cards

sentimental items, like movie tickets

junk advertisements
     
already seen, redundant items

such as belong to others


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now, what to do:

Place pile of trash, shred in the pile to shred.

Place greeting cards and similar in the file for cards.

Place receipts in receipt container

Throw out non-identifying data.

Shred or throw out malicious advertisements.

Place items that were not documents, such as CDs, etc, in their proper places.

Place all manuals in the folders for manuals.

Type in and then shred all handwritten notes.


Start scanning:

Scan business cards.


--------------------------------------------

Shredding Guide:

Tue Nov  5 00:07:27 CST 2013

Set up a recycle bin (or trash if you don't have one), and a shredder,
and go through your papers, saving any information you think would be
worth holding onto and scanning, such as phone numbers, previous
insurance policies, etc.  Be concerned about the kind of information
that can be aggregated about you based on your trash, shred medical
and similar documents.  If you want to, clip your name and address out
of catalogs and other large mailings, and shred the whole thing if it
is not too much.  Keep a roll of shredder bags if you use them near
you and watch out not to accidentally poke a hole in them.  Go through
and sort your papers, removing any staples from items to be shredded.
If you are so inclined, you could separate the non-shredded documents
into colors and blacks and whites and burn the blacks and whites.

