Skip to Content
DOL Banner
www.bls.gov
Search: [All BLS.gov                        ] for: [                    ]
Search
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
Newsroom | Tutorials | Release Calendar Release Calendar

   Home
   Subject Areas
   Databases & Tables
   Publications
   Economic Releases

A - Z Index | About BLS

   OOH
      ? Occupational Outlook Handbook
      ? Management
      ? Professional
      ? Service
      ? Sales
      ? Administrative
      ? Farming
      ? Construction
      ? Installation
      ? Production
      ? Transportation
      ? Armed Forces
   MLR
      ? Monthly Labor Review
      ? Current Issue
      ? Index
      ? Archive
   CWC
      ? Compensation and Working Conditions
      ? Compensation
      ? Safety and Health
      ? Collective Bargaining
   OOQ
      ? Occupational Outlook Quarterly
      ? Current Issue
      ? Index
      ? Archive
   TED
      ? TED: The Editor's Desk
      ? Current Article
      ? Archive
   CGI
      ? Career Guide to Industries
      ? Natural resources, construction, and utilities
      ? Manufacturing
      ? Trade
      ? Transportation
      ? Information
      ? Financial activities
      ? Professional and business services
      ? Education and health services
      ? Leisure and hospitality
      ? Government and advocacy, grantmaking, and civic organizations
   ALL

Career Guide to Industries

FONT SIZE:Minus Font SizePlus Font Size PRINT: Print

                           Utilities

                              Nature of the Industry
                              Working Conditions
                              Employment
                              Occupations In The Industry
                              Training and Advancement
                              Outlook
                              Earnings
                              Sources of Additional Information

                           Significant Points

                              Almost half of the utilities workforce will be
                               nearing retirement age within the next 10 years,
                               resulting in excellent opportunities for
                               qualified entrants.
                              Persons with college training or advanced
                               technical education will have the best
                               opportunities.
                              Skills developed in one segment of the industry
                               may not be transferable to other segments
                               because the utilities industry consists of many
                               different companies and products.
                              Earnings for production workers are
                               significantly higher than in most other
                               industries.



                           Nature of the       [About this       Back to Top
                           Industry              section]        Back to Top

                           Goods and services. The simple act of walking into a
                           restroom, turning on the light, and washing your
                           hands, uses the products of perhaps four different
                           utilities. Electricity powers the light, water
                           supply systems provide water for washing, wastewater
                           treatment plants treat the sewage, and natural gas
                           or electricity heats the water. Some government
                           establishments also provide electric, gas, water,
                           and wastewater treatment services and employ a
                           significant number of workers in similar jobs, but
                           they are part of government and not included in this
                           industry. Information concerning government
                           employment in utilities is included in the Career
                           Guide to Industries statements on Federal Government
                           and State and local government, except education and
                           health.

                           Industry organization. The utilities sector is
                           comprised of three distinctly different industries.

                           Electric power generation, transmission, and
                           distribution. This segment includes firms engaged in
                           the generation, transmission, and distribution of
                           electric power. Electric plants harness highly
                           pressurized steam, flowing water, or some force of
                           nature to spin the blades of a turbine, which is
                           attached to an electric generator. Coal is the
                           dominant fuel used to generate steam in electric
                           power plants, followed by nuclear power, natural
                           gas, petroleum, and other energy sources.
                           Hydroelectric generators are powered by the release
                           of the tremendous pressure of water existing at the
                           bottom of a dam or near a waterfall. Renewable
                           sources of electric power including geothermal,
                           wind, and solar energy are expanding rapidly, but
                           only make up a small percentage of total generation.

                           Legislative changes and industry competition have
                           created new classes of firms that generate and sell
                           electricity. Some industrial plants have their own
                           electricity-generating facilities, capable of
                           producing more power than they require. Those that
                           sell their excess power to utilities or to other
                           industrial plants are called non-utility generators
                           (NUGs). Independent power producers are a type of
                           NUG that are electricity-generating plants designed
                           to take advantage of both industry deregulation and
                           the latest generating technology to compete directly
                           with utilities for industrial and other wholesale
                           customers.

                           Transmission lines supported by huge towers connect
                           generating plants with industrial customers and
                           substations. At substations, the electricity s
                           voltage is reduced and made available for household
                           and small business use via distribution lines, which
                           usually are carried by telephone poles.

                           Natural gas distribution. Natural gas, a clear
                           odorless gas, is found underground, often near or
                           associated with crude oil reserves. Exploration and
                           extraction of natural gas is part of the oil and gas
                           extraction industry, covered elsewhere in the Career
                           Guide to Industries. Once found and brought to the
                           surface, it is transported throughout the United
                           States, Canada, and Mexico by gas transmission
                           companies using pressurized pipelines. Local
                           distribution companies take natural gas from the
                           pipeline, depressurize it, add its odor, and operate
                           the system that delivers the gas from transmission
                           pipelines to industrial, residential, and commercial
                           customers. Industrial customers, such as chemical
                           and paper manufacturing firms, account for almost a
                           third of natural gas consumption. Electric power
                           plants, residential customers who use gas for
                           heating and cooking, and commercial businesses such
                           as hospitals and restaurants account for most of the
                           remaining consumption.

                           Water, sewage, and other systems. Water utilities
                           treat and distribute nearly 34 billion gallons per
                           day to customers nationwide. Water is collected from
                           various sources such as rivers, lakes, and wells.
                           After collection, water is treated, and sold for
                           residential, industrial, agricultural, commercial,
                           and public use. Depending on the population served
                           by the water system, the utility may be a small
                           plant in a rural area that requires the occasional
                           monitoring of a single operator or a huge system of
                           reservoirs, dams, pipelines, and treatment plants
                           requiring the coordinated efforts of hundreds of
                           people. Sewage treatment facilities operate sewer
                           systems or plants that collect, treat, and dispose
                           of waste from homes and industries. Other utilities
                           include steam and air-conditioning supply utilities,
                           which produce and sell steam, heated air, and cooled
                           air.

                           Recent developments. Utilities and the services they
                           provide are so vital to everyday life that they are
                           considered public goods and are typically heavily
                           regulated. Most utility companies that distribute to
                           consumers operate as regulated monopolies because
                           utility distribution tends to require a large
                           investment in plant and equipment and it is
                           generally not desirable to have several competing
                           systems of pipes or power lines in most areas. Since
                           these companies do not face competition, they are
                           regulated by public utility commissions that ensure
                           that companies act in the public interest and set
                           the rates that are charged. However, legislative
                           changes in recent years have established and
                           promoted competition in some parts of the utilities
                           industry. Wholesale providers of electricity now
                           face competition from a number of non-utility
                           generators.

                           Many utility companies are municipally owned. In the
                           natural gas industry, for example, a majority of the
                           distribution companies in the United States are
                           municipally owned. However, they serve just a
                           fraction of the nationwide customers. Historically,
                           utilities serving large cities had sufficient
                           numbers of customers to justify the large investment
                           in infrastructure needed to run a utility, and so
                           private, investor-owned companies established
                           utility service. In rural areas, where the small
                           number of customers in need of services did not
                           provide an adequate return for private investors,
                           the State or local government, or rural cooperative
                           associations, established utility service.

                           The various segments of the utilities industry vary
                           in the degree to which their workers are involved in
                           production activities, administration and
                           management, or research and development. Industries
                           such as water supply, that employ relatively few
                           workers, employ more production workers and plant
                           operators. On the other hand, electric utilities
                           generally operate larger plants using very
                           expensive, high technology equipment, and thus
                           employ more professional and technical personnel.

                           The utilities industry is unique in that urban areas
                           with many inhabitants generally have relatively few
                           utility companies. For example, there were about
                           52,349 community water systems in the United States
                           in 2006 serving more than 281 million people. The
                           48,275 smallest water systems served only 52 million
                           people while the 4,074 largest systems served more
                           than 229 million. This shows that economies of scale
                           in the utilities industry allow a few large
                           companies to serve large numbers of customers in
                           metropolitan areas more efficiently than many
                           smaller companies. In fact, some utility companies,
                           predominately serving large metropolitan areas,
                           offer more than one type of utility service to their
                           customers.

                           Unlike most industries, the utilities industry
                           imports and exports only a small portion of its
                           product. To some degree, this is because of the
                           great difficulty in transporting electricity,
                           freshwater, and natural gas. It is also the result
                           of a national policy that utilities should be
                           self-sufficient, without dependence on imports for
                           the basic services our country requires. However,
                           easing trade restrictions, increased pipeline
                           capacity, and shipping natural gas in liquefied form
                           have made international trade in utilities more
                           feasible, especially with Canada and Mexico.

                           In 2005, Congress passed a new Energy Policy Act,
                           which is the first major legislation on energy since
                           1992. This will be a major force in the industry
                           through 2016. It was designed to promote
                           conservation and use of cleaner technologies in
                           energy production through higher efficiency
                           standards and tax credits. It is expected that
                           several new power plants will be built as a result
                           of this legislation, including new clean-burning
                           coal and nuclear facilities.



                           Working             [About this       Back to Top
                           Conditions           section]         Back to Top

                           Hours. Electricity, gas, and water are used
                           continuously throughout each day. As a result,
                           split, weekend, and night shifts are common for
                           utility workers. The average workweek for production
                           workers in utilities was 41.4 hours in 2006,
                           compared with 33.4 hours for all trade,
                           transportation, and utilities industries, and 33.9
                           hours for all private industries. Employees often
                           must work overtime to accommodate peaks in demand
                           and to repair damage caused by storms, cold weather,
                           accidents, and other occurrences. The industry
                           employs relatively few part-time workers.

                           Work environment. The hazards of working with
                           electricity, natural gas, treatment chemicals, and
                           wastes can be substantial, but generally are avoided
                           by following rigorous safety procedures. Protective
                           gear such as rubber gloves and rubber sleeves,
                           nonsparking maintenance equipment, and body suits
                           with breathing devices designed to filter out any
                           harmful fumes are mandatory for work in dangerous
                           environs. Employees also undergo extensive training
                           on working with hazardous materials and utility
                           company safety measures.

                           In 2006, the utilities industry reported 4.1 cases
                           of work-related injury or illness per 100 full-time
                           workers, compared with an average of 4.4 cases for
                           all private industries.



                           Employment          [About this       Back to Top
                                                section]         Back to Top

                           Utilities had 549,000 wage and salary jobs in 2006.
                           Electric power generation, transmission, and
                           distribution provided about 7 in 10 jobs, as shown
                           in table 1.

                           Table 1. Distribution of wage and salary employment
                                     in nongovernment utilities, 2006
                                        (Employment in thousands)
                                       Industry              Employment Percent
                                                                         

                                   Utilities, total          549        100.0

                                                                         

                              Electric power generation,
                            transmission, and distribution   397        72.3

                               Natural gas distribution      106        19.3

                           Water, sewage, and other systems  46         8.4


                           The diversity of production processes in the
                           utilities industry was reflected in the size of the
                           establishments that made up the industry. For
                           example, the electric power and natural gas
                           distribution sectors consisted of relatively large
                           plants. In 2006, electric power generation,
                           transmission, and distribution plants employed an
                           average of about 49 workers per establishment. On
                           the other hand, the water, sewage, and other systems
                           sector employed an average of only 8 workers per
                           establishment (table 2).

                            Table 2. Nongovernment establishments in utilities
                              and average employment per establishment, 2006
                                                     Number of     Employment
                                  Industry         establishments      per
                                                                  establishment
                                                                   

                            Total, all utilities   16,100         34

                                                                   

                               Electric power
                                 generation,
                              transmission, and    8,000          49
                                distribution

                                 Natural gas
                                distribution       2,600          40

                             Water, sewage, and
                                other systems      5,500          8


                           Although many establishments are small, the majority
                           of utilities jobs were in establishments with 100 or
                           more workers (chart 1).

                               More than 9 out of 10 establishments in the
                             utilities industry have fewer than 100 workers.



                           Occupations in      [About this       Back to Top
                           the Industry          section]        Back to Top

                           About 226,000 jobs approximately 41 percent of all
                           wage and salary jobs in the utilities industry were
                           in production or installation, maintenance, and
                           repair occupations in 2006 (table 3). About 21
                           percent of jobs were in office and administrative
                           support occupations; 14 percent were in professional
                           and related occupations; and 12 percent were in
                           management, business, and financial occupations. The
                           remaining jobs were in construction, transportation,
                           sales, and service occupations.

                           Production and installation, maintenance, and repair
                           occupations. Workers in these occupations install
                           and maintain pipelines and powerlines, operate and
                           fix plant machinery, and monitor treatment
                           processes. For example, electrical powerline
                           installers and repairers install and repair cables
                           or wires used in electrical power or distribution
                           systems. They install insulators, wooden poles,
                           transformers, and light- or heavy-duty transmission
                           towers. First-line supervisors and managers directly
                           supervise and coordinate the activities of
                           production and repair workers. These supervisors
                           coordinate workload and work assignments and help to
                           ensure a safe and productive work environment.

                           Production occupations include power plant operators
                           , power distributors and dispatchers, and water and
                           liquid waste treatment plant operators. Power plant
                           operators control or operate machinery, such as
                           stream-driven turbine generators, to generate
                           electric power, often using control boards or
                           semi-automatic equipment. Power distributors and
                           dispatchers coordinate, regulate, or distribute
                           electricity or steam in generating stations, over
                           transmission lines to substations, and over electric
                           power lines. Water and liquid waste treatment plant
                           and system operators control the process of treating
                           water or wastewater, take samples of water for
                           testing, and may perform maintenance of treatment
                           plants.

                           Industrial machinery mechanics install, repair, and
                           maintain machinery in power generating stations, gas
                           plants, and water treatment plants. They repair and
                           maintain the mechanical components of generators,
                           waterwheels, water-inlet controls, and piping in
                           generating stations; steam boilers, condensers,
                           pumps, compressors, and similar equipment in gas
                           manufacturing plants; and equipment used to process
                           and distribute water for public and industrial uses.

                           General maintenance and repair workers perform work
                           involving a variety of maintenance skills to keep
                           machines, mechanical equipment, and the structure of
                           an establishment in repair. Generally found in small
                           establishments, these workers have duties that may
                           involve pipefitting, boilermaking, electrical work,
                           carpentry, welding, and installing new equipment.

                           Office and administrative support occupations. These
                           occupations account for about a quarter of jobs in
                           the utilities industry. Customer service
                           representatives interview applicants for water, gas,
                           and electric service. They talk with customers by
                           phone or in person and receive orders for
                           installation, activation, discontinuance, or change
                           in service. General office clerks may do
                           bookkeeping, typing, office machine operation, and
                           filing. Utilities meter readers read electric, gas,
                           water, or steam consumption meters visually or
                           remotely using radio transmitters and record the
                           volume used by residential and industrial customers.
                           Financial clerks, such as bookkeeping, accounting,
                           and auditing clerks, compute, classify, and record
                           numerical data to keep financial records complete.
                           They perform any combination of routine calculating,
                           posting, and verifying duties to obtain primary
                           financial data for use in maintaining accounting
                           records.

                           Professional and managerial occupations. 
                           Professional and related occupations in this
                           industry include engineers and computer specialists.
                           Engineers develop technologies that allow, for
                           example, utilities to produce and transmit gas and
                           electricity more efficiently and water more cleanly.
                           They also may develop improved methods of landfill
                           or wastewater treatment operations in order to
                           maintain compliance with government regulations.
                           Computer specialists develop computer systems to
   Industries             automate utility processes; provide plant simulators
   Natural resources,     for operator training; and improve operator decision
    construction, and      making. Engineering technicians assist engineers in
    utilities              research activities and may conduct some research
      ? Agriculture,       independently.
        forestry, and
        fishing            Managers and administrators in the utilities
      ? Construction       industry plan, organize, direct, and coordinate
      ? Mining             management activities. They often are responsible
      ? Utilities          for maintaining an adequate supply of electricity,
   Manufacturing          gas, water, steam, or sanitation service.
      ? Aerospace product  
        and parts           Table 3. Employment of wage and salary workers in
        manufacturing      utilities by occupation, 2006 and projected change,
      ? Chemical                                2006-2016.
        manufacturing,                  (Employment in thousands)
        except                                           Employment,   Percent
        pharmaceutical and          Occupation               2006      change,
        medicine                                        Number Percent 2006-16
        manufacturing            All occupations        548    100.0   -5.7
      ? Computer and
        electronic product  
        manufacturing       Management, business, and
      ? Food manufacturing    financial occupations     66     12.1    -8.7
      ? Machinery
        manufacturing             Top executives        11     1.9     -15.6
      ? Motor vehicle and
        parts                Administrative services
        manufacturing                managers           2      0.4     -9.7
      ? Pharmaceutical and
        medicine                Financial managers      2      0.4     -8.6
        manufacturing
      ? Printing               Engineering managers     4      0.8     -8.2
      ? Steel
        manufacturing      Buyers and purchasing agents 4      0.7     -11.2
      ? Textile, textile
        product, and        Human resources, training,
        apparel                and labor relations      5      1.0     -5.5
        manufacturing              specialists
   Trade
      ? Automobile dealers     Management analysts      5      1.0     -8.9
      ? Clothing,
        accessory, and          Business operation
        general               specialists, all other    7      1.3     -1.3
        merchandise stores
      ? Grocery stores       Accountants and auditors   6      1.2     -8.0
      ? Wholesale trade
   Transportation          
      ? Air transportation   Professional and related
      ? Truck                      occupations          78     14.3    -4.4
        transportation and
        warehousing            Computer specialists     16     2.9     -1.4
   Information
      ? Broadcasting           Electrical engineers     13     2.3     0.5
      ? Internet
      ? Motion picture and    Industrial engineers,
        video industries   including health and safety  2      0.4     7.2
      ? Publishing, except
        software                Nuclear engineers       4      0.8     0.2
      ? Software
        publishers          Electrical and electronic
      ? Telecommunications   engineering technicians    8      1.4     -8.6
   Financial activities
      ? Banking               Surveying and mapping
      ? Insurance                  technicians          3      0.5     -10.0
      ? Securities,
        commodities, and       Nuclear technicians      3      0.6     0.8
        other investments
   Professional and        
    business services          Service occupations      7      1.3     -7.1
      ? Advertising and
        public relations         Security guards        3      0.6     -8.8
        services
      ? Computer systems    
        design and related  Office and administrative
        services               support occupations      116    21.1    -10.3
      ? Employment
        services             First-line supervisors/
      ? Management,           managers of office and
        scientific, and       administrative support    8      1.4     -13.7
        technical                    workers
        consulting
        services           Bill and account collectors  4      0.7     -10.0
      ? Scientific
        research and        Billing and posting clerks
        development           and machine operators     4      0.8     -15.9
        services
   Education and health   Bookkeeping, accounting, and
    services                     auditing clerks        7      1.2     -3.1
      ? Child day care
        services                 Customer service
      ? Educational              representatives        30     5.5     -0.8
        services
      ? Health care                Dispatchers          4      0.7     -19.0
      ? Social assistance,
        except child day     Meter readers, utilities   19     3.6     -16.8
        care
   Leisure and               Stock clerks and order
    hospitality                      fillers            4      0.8     -24.0
      ? Arts,
        entertainment, and  Executive secretaries and
        recreation          administrative assistants   8      1.5     -6.9
      ? Food services and
        drinking places     Secretaries, except legal,
      ? Hotels and other      medical, and executive    6      1.1     -12.6
        accommodations
   Government and            Office clerks, general    10     1.8     -6.6
    advocacy, grantmaking,
    and civic               
    organizations          Construction and extraction
      ? Advocacy,                  occupations          33     6.0     -6.7
        grantmaking, and
        civic                Operating engineers and
        organizations      other construction equipment 5      0.9     -6.7
      ? Federal Government          operators
      ? State and local
        government, except         Electricians         8      1.5     -5.2
        education and
        health                Pipelayers, plumbers,
                                 pipefitters, and       10     1.7     -7.8
SEARCH CGI                         steamfitters
[                    ]
[Go]                        
                            Installation, maintenance,
   Related Links             and repair occupations    149    27.1    -3.6
   Career Guide Index
   Local and State          First-line supervisors/
    Outlook                   managers of mechanics,    15     2.8     -8.2
   How Industries Differ   installers, and repairers
   Other CGI Info
      ? Highlights          Electrical and electronics
      ? Information in the    repairers, powerhouse,    17     3.0     -8.3
        Career Guide          substation, and relay
      ? Overview and
        Outlook            Vehicle and mobile equipment
      ? Acknowledgements    mechanics, installers, and  6      1.1     -8.2
      ? Important Note              repairers
   How to Order a Copy
   Additional Links       Control and valve installers
      ? Occupational          and repairers, except     19     3.4     -4.1
        Outlook Handbook         mechanical door
      ? Career articles
        from the OOQ           Industrial machinery
      ? Employment                  mechanics           8      1.4     6.9
        Projections
      ? Publications Home     Maintenance and repair
      ? BLS Home                 workers, general       11     2.0     -5.4

                              Electrical power-line
                             installers and repairers   57     10.4    0.4

                            
                              Production occupations    77     14.0    0.9

                              Nuclear power reactor
                                    operators           3      0.6     10.3

                              Power distributors and
                                   dispatchers          6      1.1     -8.2

                              Power plant operators     24     4.4     0.9

                             Stationary engineers and
                                 boiler operators       4      0.7     -4.5

                              Water and liquid waste
                            treatment plant and system  11     2.0     26.6
                                    operators

                               Gas plant operators      6      1.0     -6.7

                            
                           Transportation and material
                                moving occupations      12     2.2     -11.8

                            
                           Note: Columns may not add to totals due to omission
                           of occupations with small employment




                           Training and        [About this       Back to Top
                           Advancement           section]        Back to Top

                           Utilities provide career opportunities for persons
                           with varying levels of experience and education.
                           However, because the utilities industry consists of
                           many different companies and products, skills
                           developed in one segment of the industry may not be
                           transferable to other segments.

                           High school graduates qualify for many entry-level
                           production jobs. In some cases, however, safety and
                           security regulations require higher standards for
                           employment, such as documented proof of the skills
                           and abilities necessary to complete the work. As a
                           result, a degree from a college, university, or
                           technical school may be required. Production workers
                           may start as laborers or in other unskilled jobs
                           and, by going through an apprenticeship program and
                           gaining on-the-job experience, advance into
                           better-paying positions that require greater skills
                           or have greater responsibility.

                           Substantial advancement is possible even within a
                           single occupation. For example, power plant
                           operators may move up through several levels of
                           responsibility until they reach the highest paying
                           operator jobs. Advancement in production occupations
                           generally requires mastery of advanced skills on the
                           job, usually with some formal training provided by
                           the employer or through additional vocational
                           training at a 2-year technical college or trade
                           school.

                           Most computer, engineering, and technician jobs
                           require technical education after high school,
                           although opportunities exist for persons with
                           degrees ranging from an associate degree to a
                           doctorate. These workers are usually familiar with
                           company objectives and production methods which,
                           combined with college education, equip them with
                           many of the tools necessary for advancement to
                           management positions. Graduates of 2-year technical
                           institutes usually fill technician positions.
                           Sometimes, graduates of engineering programs will
                           start as technicians until an opportunity to advance
                           into an engineering position arises.

                           Managerial jobs generally require a 4-year college
                           degree, although a 2-year technical degree may be
                           sufficient in smaller plants. Managers usually can
                           advance into higher level management jobs without
                           additional formal training outside the workplace.



                           Outlook             [About this       Back to Top
                                                section]         Back to Top

                           Employment in utilities is expected to decline, but
                           many job openings will arise because large numbers
                           of many workers in the industry are approaching
                           retirement age and will need to be replaced.

                           Employment change. Wage and salary employment in
                           utilities is expected to decline 6 percent between
                           2006 and 2016, compared with an increase of about 11
                           percent for all industries combined. Projected
                           employment change varies by industry segment, as
                           shown in table 4. Although electric power, natural
                           gas and water continue to be essential to everyday
                           life, employment declines will result from the
                           retirement of much of the industry s workforce.
                           While utilities are doing what they can to replace
                           these workers, the wide variety of careers open to
                           people with technical skills will make it difficult
                           for companies to find enough applicants to fill
                           these openings. Utilities will be forced to further
                           automate their systems, negotiate part-time status
                           with retirees and contract with employment services
                           to make up for the difference between the desired
                           number of employees and the number of workers
                           actually available.

                                 Table 4. Projected employment growth in
                           nongovernment utilities by industry segment, 2006-16
                                       Industry segment               Percent
                                                                       change
                                                                      

                              Total, all nongovernment utilities     -5.7

                                                                      

                            Electric power generation, transmission
                                       and distribution              -5.3

                                   Natural gas distribution          -17.6

                                Water, sewage and other systems      18.7


                           Reorganization of electric utilities has increased
                           competition and provided incentives for improved
                           efficiency. This has resulted in extensive
                           cost-cutting and a number of mergers, which have led
                           to a decline in employment over the past several
                           years. This has been accomplished by a combination
                           of layoffs and hiring freezes, which have resulted
                           in an older workforce than in most other industries.
                           Because electric utilities tend to be particularly
                           labor intensive and require technically-minded
                           people who are in high demand in other industries,
                           they will have the most difficulty recruiting enough
                           replacements. Worker attrition will be managed by
                           further automation of systems and more
                           responsibility for workers.

                           In the gas transmission and distribution industry,
                           regulatory changes have made it possible for
                           wholesale and even some retail buyers to choose
                           their own natural gas providers. While distributors
                           still maintain local monopolies, they are highly
                           regulated and are not allowed to mark up the
                           wholesale price of natural gas. Their revenues are
                           based on distribution fees, which vary based on
                           infrastructure needs rather than actual use of
                           natural gas. These regulatory changes have resulted
                           in several mergers and an emphasis on cost-cutting.
                           As in the area of electric power, this has led to
                           hiring freezes which have resulted in an older
                           workforce. As these people retire, there will not be
                           enough applicants to replace them, forcing the
                           industry to find new ways to fill its needs.

                           In the water and sewage systems industries,
                           regulatory changes have had the opposite impact.
                           While most water systems remain locally-operated and
                           fairly small in scale, water quality standards for
                           both drinking water and disposal of wastewater have
                           been increased for public health and environmental
                           reasons. While hiring freezes have been less common
                           in water than in other parts of the industry, much
                           of the water workforce is nearing retirement age.
                           Water and sewage systems services are projected to
                           grow slightly, as water systems are expanding
                           rapidly despite the difficulty in securing workers.
                           Employment is projected to increase 18.7 percent
                           from 2006 to 2016.

                           Job prospects. Job prospects for qualified
                           applicants entering the utilities industry are
                           expected to be excellent during the next 10 years.
                           As of 2006, about 55 percent of the utilities
                           industry workforce is over the age of 45 (table 5).
                           Many of these workers will either retire or prepare
                           to retire within the next 10 years. Because
                           on-the-job training is very intensive in many
                           utilities industry occupations, preparing a new
                           workforce will be one of the industry s highest
                           priorities during the next decade.

                             Table 5. Percent distribution of
                              employment, by age group, 2006
                            Age group   Utilities All industries
                              Total     100.0%    100.0%

                                                   

                              16-19     0.4       4.3

                              20-24     3.3       9.6

                              25-34     15.5      21.5

                              35-44     26.1      23.9

                              45-54     38.2      23.6

                              55-64     15.3      13.4

                           65 and older 1.2       3.7


                           In general, persons with college training in
                           advanced technology will have the best opportunities
                           in the utilities industry. Computer systems analysts
                           and network systems and data communications analysts
                           are expected to be among the fastest growing
                           occupations in the professional and related
                           occupations group, as plants emphasize automation
                           and productivity. Some office and administrative
                           support workers, such as utilities meter readers and
                           bookkeeping, accounting, and auditing clerks, are
                           among those adversely affected by increasing
                           automation and outsourcing. Technologies including
                           radio-transmitted meter reading and computerized
                           billing procedures are expected to decrease
                           employment.

                           New and continuing energy policies also provide
                           investment tax credits for research and development
                           of renewable sources of energy and ways to improve
                           the efficiency of equipment used in electric
                           utilities. As a result, electric utilities will
                           continue to increase the productivity of their
                           plants and workers, resulting in a slowdown in new
                           employment. This slowdown will lead to keen
                           competition for some jobs in the industry. However,
                           at the same time, these new technologies will create
                           jobs for highly skilled technical personnel with the
                           education and experience to take advantage of these
                           developments in electric utilities.



                           Earnings            [About this       Back to Top
                                                section]         Back to Top

                           Industry earnings. Overall, production workers in
                           the utilities industry had average weekly earnings
                           of $27.42 in 2006. Earnings varied by industry
                           segment within utilities (table 6). Average weekly
                           earnings for production workers were higher in
                           natural gas distribution and in electric power
                           generation than in water, sewage, and other systems.

                            Table 6. Average earnings and hours of production
                              workers in nongovernment utilities by industry
                                              segment, 2006
                                  Industry segment           Earnings    Weekly
                                                           Weekly Hourly hours
                                                                          

                               Total, private industry     $568   $16.76 33.9

                                                                          

                               Nongovernment utilities     1136   27.42  41.4

                             Power generation and supply   1173   28.36  41.4

                              Natural gas distribution     1159   27.66  41.9

                              Water, sewage, and other
                                       systems             751    18.39  40.8


                           Earnings in utilities were generally higher than
                           earnings in other industries. The hourly earnings
                           for production workers in utilities averaged $27.42
                           in 2006, compared with $16.76 in all private
                           industry. This was due in part to more overtime and
                           weekend work, as utility plant operations must be
                           monitored 24 hours a day. Earnings in selected
                           occupations in utilities appear in table 7.

                              Table 7. Median hourly earnings of the largest
                                    occupations in utilities, May 2006
                                     Occupation            Utilities    All
                                                                     industries
                                Electrical engineers       $37.44    $36.50

                           First-line supervisors/managers
                            of mechanics, installers, and  32.57     25.91
                                      repairers

                             Electrical and electronics
                               repairers, powerhouse,      28.26     27.60
                                substation, and relay

                                Power plant operators      27.24     26.44

                                Electrical power-line
                              installers and repairers     26.05     24.41

                            Control and valve installers
                                and repairers, except      25.22     21.84
                                   mechanical door

                           Maintenance and repair workers,
                                       general             21.11     15.34

                                  Customer service
                                   representatives         16.89     13.62

                               Water and liquid waste
                             treatment plant and system    16.75     17.34
                                      operators

                              Meter readers, utilities     16.33     14.58


                           Benefits and union membership. Most full-time
                           workers in the utilities industry receive
                           substantial benefits in addition to their salaries
                           or hourly wages. This is particularly true for those
                           workers covered by a collective bargaining
                           agreement. In 2006, about 27.4 percent of workers in
                           utilities were union members or covered by union
                           contracts, more than double the proportion for all
                           industries.



                           Sources of          [About this       Back to Top
                           Additional            section]        Back to Top
                           Information

                           Disclaimer:

                           Links to non-BLS Internet sites are provided for
                           your convenience and do not constitute an
                           endorsement.

                           General information on employment in the utilities
                           industry is available from local utilities and:

                              Center for Energy Workforce Development, 701
                               Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20004-2696.
                               Internet: http://www.cewd.org

                           Information on employment in electric power
                           generation and distribution is available from:

                              American Public Power Association, 2301 M St.
                               NW, Washington, DC 20037-1484. Internet: http://
                               www.appanet.org
                              International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers,
                               1125 15th St. NW, Washington, DC 20005.

                           Information on employment in natural gas
                           transmission and distribution is available from:

                              American Public Gas Association, 201
                               Massachusetts Ave. NE, Suite C-4, Washington, DC
                               20002. Internet: http://www.apga.org

                           Information on employment in water and wastewater
                           treatment is available from:

                              American Water Works Association, 6666 West
                               Quincy, Denver, CO 80235. Internet: http://
                               www.awwa.org
                              Water Environment Federation, 601 Wythe St.,
                               Alexandria, VA 22314. Internet: http://
                               www.wef.org

                           Detailed information on many key occupations in the
                           utilities industry, including the following, may be
                           found in the 2008-09 edition of the Occupational
                           Outlook Handbook.

                              Computer scientists and database administrators
                              Construction laborers
                              Engineering technicians
                              Engineers
                              Industrial machinery mechanics and maintenance
                               workers
                              Line installers and repairers
                              Power plant operators, distributors, and
                               dispatchers
                              Stationary engineers and boiler operators
                              Water and liquid waste treatment plant and
                               system operators



                           NAICS Codes      [About the NAICS     Back to Top
                                                 codes]          Back to Top

                           22

                           Suggested citation: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S.
                           Department of Labor, Career Guide to Industries,
                           2008-09 Edition, Utilities, on the Internet at http:
                           //www.bls.gov/oco/cg/cgs018.htm (visited April 16,
                           2009 ).

                            

                           Last Modified Date: March 4, 2008

Quick Links

Tools               Calculators      Help            Info

   At a Glance        Inflation       Help &         What's New
    Tables             Location         Tutorials      Careers @ BLS
   Economic News       Quotient        A to Z         Find It! DOL
    Releases           Injury And       Index          Join our Mailing Lists
   Databases &         Illness         FAQs           Privacy & Security
    Tables                              Glossary       Linking & Copyright
   Maps                                About BLS       Information
                                        Contact Us

Bureau of Labor Statistics

Sorry for the interruption.

Please help us improve our website by participating in the survey that begins
below!

Our Pledge of Privacy
The answers you provide on this survey will be used by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) to improve the website. Please note:

   Your participation is completely voluntary and anonymous.
   We estimate that it will take an average of two minutes to complete this
    survey.
   Privacy Act Statement

Click on the yes button below to take the survey after you have finished
visiting our website. The survey will be available in the taskbar at the bottom
of your screen when you are ready to take it.

Yes, I would like to participate.   No thanks.

Modal Box Footer
               *                                                        
Back to Top                                                             bls.gov
Back to Top    SpacerFreedom of Information Act | Customer Survey | Do  Home
               you have a technical Web site question?

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics Office of Occupational Statistics and
Employment Projections Suite 2135, 2 Massachusetts Avenue, NE Washington, DC
20212-0001

www.bls.gov/oco/cg | Telephone: (202) 691-5700 | Fax: (202) 691-5745 Do you
have a question about the Career Guide to Industries?

